1) What is the purpose of Ansible?

Answer:
Ansible is a configuration management and automation tool used to automate application deployment, server configuration, and infrastructure provisioning in a simple, agentless manner.

2) What is Host Inventory?

Answer:
Host inventory is a file that defines managed nodes (hosts), groups, IP addresses, and variables that Ansible uses to run playbooks.

3) Explain a few ad-hoc commands in Ansible

Answer:
Ad-hoc commands are one-line commands used for quick tasks:

ansible all -m ping
ansible all -m yum -a "name=git state=present"
ansible all -m shell -a "uptime"

4) What is a Playbook?

Answer:
A playbook is a YAML file that contains a set of plays and tasks defining how Ansible should configure and manage hosts.

5) Write a sample playbook to install git on all host nodes

---
- name: Install git on all hosts
  hosts: all
  become: yes
  tasks:
    - name: Install git package
      yum:
        name: git
        state: present
6) What is a Handler in playbook?

Answer:
A handler is a special task that runs only when notified by another task, commonly used to restart services after configuration changes.

7) What is a tag and why do we need it?

Answer:
Tags allow you to run specific tasks or plays selectively instead of executing the entire playbook.

ansible-playbook playbook.yml --tags install

8) What modules have you used in Ansible playbooks?

Answer:
Commonly used modules include:
yum, apt, copy, template, service, file, shell, command, user, group, git, docker_container.

9) How do you secure playbooks?

Answer:
By using Ansible Vault to encrypt sensitive data, restricting file permissions, using SSH keys, and avoiding hardcoded credentials.

10) Why do we need to create Ansible Roles?

Answer:
Roles help organize playbooks, promote reusability, and maintain clean, modular, and scalable Ansible code.

11) What is Register module in Ansible?

Answer:
register is used to store the output of a task into a variable, which can be reused in later tasks.
- command: uptime
  register: uptime_output
In AWS we have User Data to execute scripts while launching a machine. Then why do we need Ansible?

Answer:
12) AWS User Data is used for one-time initialization of an EC2 instance, such as installing packages or basic configuration during launch. However, it is not suitable for ongoing configuration management.

Ansible is used to continuously manage, update, and maintain configurations across multiple servers. It is idempotent, reusable, easy to modify, and can be executed anytime after the server is running.

In real-time projects, User Data is used for initial bootstrap, and Ansible is used for configuration management, application deployment, patching, and scaling.

